---
dg-publish: true
---
#Notes 

Suppose that Alice and Bob each have a particle, and their systems are in a *pure* product state e.g.

$$
|\chi \rangle =|0\rangle |+\rangle
$$

In this case, it is rather straightforward to answer the question "*what is the state of the first system (Alice's system)*" - it is just $|0\rangle$. If we were ignoring the second system, we could use $|0\rangle$ to predict the outcome of any measurement made solely on the first system. 

But what is we consider not a product state, but an [[3.1 The Hilbert space of two-party quantum systems - the tensor product#^9da800|entangled]] state, such as the [[Vectors#Bell States|Bell state]]

$$
|\Phi \rangle =\frac{|0\rangle |0\rangle +|1\rangle |1\rangle }{\sqrt{ 2 }}
$$

Now it is no longer easy to see what the state of the first system is; indeed, this is exactly what an entangled state is: we cannot factor it into separate states for each system. In order to understand what the answer should be, we need to consider *ignoring Bob's system* and *asking Alice to make measurements of the [[Operators#Pauli Operators|Pauli operators]] $X, Y$ and $Z$*. If we do this calculation, we would find that the probability to obtain $+1$ and $-1$ are equal. However, there is no pure qubit state $|\psi \rangle$ that has this property, and so we cannot create a pure state of this kind as we had hoped. 

We will show that Alice's qubit when considered on its own behaves as if it was in a *maximally mixed state* $\rho=\frac{1}{2}I=\frac{1}{2}(|0\rangle \langle 0|+|1\rangle \langle 1|)$. That is, her qubit is described by a [[5.1 The density operator|density operator]] corresponding to a mixed state, not a pure quantum state.

We will see in fact that this is a hallmark of entanglement; when particles are entangled, subsystems necessarily become mixed quantum states, described by density operators. This is one of the main reasons we introduced density operators in the first place, to allow us to consistently describe *parts* of systems. 

In contrast to the density operator introduced in [[5.1 The density operator]], which was done due to ignorance (i.e. we didn't know what state was being sent), we now know everything about the initial state - and yet we still need density operators here!

We will now show how this result arises. Suppose that Alice and Bob share the maximally entangled state 

$$
|\Phi \rangle =\frac{|0\rangle |0\rangle +|1\rangle |1\rangle }{\sqrt{ 2 }}
$$

as above, and Alice measures $X=|+\rangle \langle+|-|-\rangle \langle-|$ on her subsystem (i.e. $X\otimes I$ is measured on the whole system). This can be written as 

$$
X\otimes I=|+\rangle \langle +|\otimes I-|-\rangle \langle -|\otimes I
$$

Then, the probability for Alice to obtain the result $+1$ is 

$$
\begin{align}
P(+1)  & = \Bigg |\Bigg| \Big (|+\rangle \langle +|\otimes I\Big) \frac{|0\rangle |0\rangle +|1\rangle |1\rangle }{\sqrt{ 2 }}\Bigg|\Bigg|^2 \\  \\

 & = \Bigg|\Bigg| \frac{\langle +|0\rangle |+\rangle |0\rangle + \langle +|1\rangle |+\rangle |1\rangle }{\sqrt{ 2 }}\Bigg|\Bigg|^{2} \\
 \\
 & =\Bigg|\Bigg||+\rangle  \frac{\langle +|0\rangle |0\rangle +\langle +|1\rangle |1\rangle }{\sqrt{ 2 }}\Bigg|\Bigg|^2 \\
   \\
&= \frac{\langle +|0\rangle  \langle 0|+\rangle +\langle +|1\rangle  \langle 1|+\rangle }{2} \\
 \\
 
 & = \langle +| \left( \frac{|0\rangle \langle 0|+|1\rangle \langle 1|}{2} \right)|+\rangle  
\end{align}
$$

> [!help] Note
> In the second line, the inner products are moved to the front of each term (since they are just scalars). In the third line, we simply take the $|+\rangle$ out of the fraction since it is common amongst both terms *as the first system*.
> In the fourth line, we do $|||\psi \rangle||^2=\langle\psi|\psi \rangle$. 

The operator inside the brackets *is* the maximally mixed state ($\frac{1}{2}I$). This is exactly [[5.1 The density operator#^be55cf|the form of the density operator]] from before - the form we would use to calculate the probability of obtaining the result $+1$ when measuring $X$ on the maximally mixed state. This means that as far as the measurement is concerned, Alice's qubit is behaving identically to the *maximally mixed state*. 

If we carried out this calculation for a measurement $Y$ or $Z$ - or *any other operator* for that matter - we would arrive at the same conclusion. For this reason, we conclude that this is the *correct* description of Alice's qubit. 

We call this her **reduced density operator**. It is the density operator that describes her subsystem (if we are interested *only* in her subsystem). We denote this $\rho_{A}$. Bob will have a similar reduced density operator $\rho_{B}$. 

In general, how do we find the reduced density operator for an arbitrary state $|\Psi\rangle$? There are two very nice ways to do it. The first is done by extending the definition of the [[5.1 The density operator#^fad126|trace]] to subsystems, called the **partial trace**, and the second is essentially a fast way to carry out the partial trace.


> [!info] The partial trace
> The *partial trace* is a way of applying the [[5.1 The density operator#^fad126|trace]] operation to only one part of an operator that acts on a [[3.3 Operations on tensor product states|tensor product space]], rather than the whole operator. 
> The partial trace over the second space is a [[1.2 Linear Operators|linear]] operation that performs the trace on the second space, leaving the first unchanged
> $$\text{tr} _{2} (|u\rangle \langle v|\otimes|w\rangle \langle x|)=\langle x|w\rangle |u\rangle \langle v|\quad \text{for all } |u\rangle ,|v\rangle ,|w\rangle ,|x\rangle $$ 
> The partial trace over the second system takes operators that act jointly on both Hilbert spaces to operators that act only on the first. 
> Colloquially, we say the partial trace *traces out* a space - it "removes" the space that it acts on by converting it a complex number. 
> Analogously, the operation of *tracing out the first space* or more formally *the partial trace over the first space* is the linear operation that satisfies 
> $$\text{tr} _{1} (|u\rangle \langle v|\otimes|w\rangle \langle x|)=\langle v|u\rangle |w\rangle \langle x|\quad \text{for all } |u\rangle ,|v\rangle ,|w\rangle ,|x\rangle $$
> i.e. we have simply applied the trace on the first Hilbert space, instead of the second. 
> Sometimes, it is natural to label the two Hilbert spaces as $A$ and $B$, rather than "first" or "second" (here we would write $\text{tr}_{A}$ etc.). This might be referred to as *tracing out $A$* or *tracing out Alice*. 

Let's apply the partial trace to the entangled state $|\Phi \rangle$ from above and confirm we get back $\frac{1}{2}I$ as the reduced density operator for Alice.  ^94e446

$$
\begin{align}
\rho_{A}=\text{tr} (|\Phi \rangle \langle \Phi|) & =\text{tr} _{B}\left[ \left( \frac{|0\rangle |0\rangle +|1\rangle |1\rangle }{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)\left( \frac{\langle 0|\langle 0|+\langle 1|\langle 1|}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right) \right] \\
 \\
 & =\frac{1}{2}\text{tr} _{B} \Big [ |0\rangle \langle 0|\otimes|0\rangle \langle 0|+|0\rangle \langle 1|\otimes|0\rangle \langle 1|+|1\rangle \langle 0|\otimes|1\rangle \langle 0|+|1\rangle \langle 1|\otimes|1\rangle \langle 1| \Big] \\
 \\
 & =\frac{1}{2} \Big[ \langle 0|0\rangle |0\rangle \langle 0|+\langle 1|0\rangle |0\rangle \langle 1|+\langle 0|1\rangle |1\rangle \langle 0|+\langle 1|1\rangle |1\rangle \langle 1|\Big] \\
 \\
 & = \frac{1}{2} \Big [|0\rangle \langle 0|+|1\rangle \langle 1|\Big]=\frac{1}{2}I
\end{align}
$$


> [!help] Note
> In the second line, we used the [[Notation points for operators on tensor product spaces#^33c84e|formula]] 
> $$|i\rangle |j\rangle \langle k|\langle l|=|i\rangle \langle |\otimes|j\rangle \langle l|$$
> which are different forms of the same operator (the second one allowing us to apply the trace easily).
> We also note that we used the linearity of the trace in the third line to split the one trace into four that can be evaluated separately.

Let us now see how to carry out the partial trace more indirectly, and effectively just "write-down" the reduced density operator directly. Let us consider some arbitrary state of two qubits given by

$$
|\Psi\rangle =\alpha|0\rangle|0\rangle +\beta|0\rangle |1\rangle +\gamma |1\rangle |0\rangle +\delta|1\rangle |1\rangle 
$$

On the one hand, we could just calculate the reduced density (of the first subsystem), namely 

$$
\begin{align}
\rho_{1} & = \text{tr} _{2}(|\Psi\rangle \langle \Psi|) \\
 \\
 & = \text{tr} _{2}([\alpha|0\rangle|0\rangle +\beta|0\rangle |1\rangle +\gamma |1\rangle |0\rangle +\delta|1\rangle |1\rangle ][\alpha^*\langle 0|\langle 0|+\beta^*\langle 0|\langle 1|+\gamma^*\langle 1|\langle 0|+\delta^{*}\langle 1|\langle 1|] ) \\
 \\
 & = |\alpha |^{2}|0\rangle \langle 0|+\alpha \gamma^{*}|0\rangle \langle 1| + \alpha^{*}\gamma|1\rangle \langle 0|+|\gamma|^2|1\rangle \langle 1|+|\beta|^2|0\rangle \langle 0|+\beta \delta^{*}|0\rangle \langle 1|+|\delta|^{2}|1\rangle \langle 1|
\end{align}
$$

>[!help] Note
>We have skipped a lot of steps in this calculation as it is very long (*see lecture notes equation 7.9*). Essentially, a lot of terms end up cancelling out to give us this final result.

As stated above, a lot of terms cancel out - particularly those *whose ket and bra differ*. That means that if we took the approach above, we would waste a lot of time writing stuff out that will cancel anyway. We will find a way around this by determining which terms will cancel first.

Look at the final equality above - we can write this as 

$$
\rho_{1}=(\alpha|0\rangle +\gamma|1\rangle )(\alpha^{*}\langle 0|+\gamma^{*}\langle 1|)+(\beta|0\rangle +\delta|1\rangle )(\beta^{*}\langle 0|+\delta^{*}\langle 1|)
$$

We can factor the original state as well:

$$
|\Psi\rangle =(\alpha|0\rangle +\gamma|1\rangle )|0\rangle +(\beta|0\rangle +\delta|1\rangle )|1\rangle 
$$

This is in terms of *basis states in the system being traced out* (in this case in terms of the second qubit) as we see in the equation for $\rho_{1}$. This is completely general, and so provides us with a way to *write down* the density operator - first we factorise it, then we use these states to write the density operator.

Let's see an example to make this clearer. Let's try and write $\rho_{2}=\text{tr}_{1}(|\Psi\rangle \langle\Psi|)$ directly. Since we want to trace out the first qubit, we start by writing $|\Psi\rangle$ factorised in terms of the first qubit:

$$
|\Psi\rangle =|0\rangle (\alpha|0\rangle +\beta|1\rangle )+|1\rangle (\gamma|0\rangle +\delta|1\rangle )
$$

It is then the states $\alpha|0\rangle+\beta|1\rangle$ and $\gamma|0\rangle+\delta|1\rangle$ of the second qubit, which appear alongside $|0\rangle$ and $|1\rangle$ respectively which form the density operator i.e. $\rho_{2}$ can be written as

$$
\rho_{2}= (\alpha|0\rangle +\beta|1\rangle )(\alpha^{*}\langle 0|+\beta^{*}\langle 1|)+(\gamma|0\rangle +\delta|1\rangle )(\gamma^{*}\langle 0|+\delta^{*}\langle 1|)
$$


> [!info] Generalisation
> Consider a general orthonormal basis $\{ |u\rangle,|v\rangle \}$. A general state in this basis will have the form
> $$|\Psi\rangle = \alpha|u\rangle | u\rangle +\beta|u\rangle | v\rangle +\gamma|v\rangle | u\rangle +\delta|v\rangle | v\rangle $$
> This can be written in terms of the first qubit as 
> $$|\Psi\rangle = |u\rangle (\alpha |u\rangle + \beta|v\rangle )+|v\rangle (\gamma|u\rangle +\delta|v\rangle )=|u\rangle |\phi_{1}\rangle +|v\rangle |\phi_{2}\rangle $$
> Then, the reduced density operator of the second subsystem is just 
> $$\rho_{1}=|\phi_{1}\rangle \langle \phi_{1}|+|\phi_{2}\rangle \langle \phi_{2}|$$
> with a similar approach for the reduced density operator of the first subsystem available by just doing each step to the other qubit.

As a final calculation, let's return to the [[5.2 Properties of the density operator#^53c5eb|maximally entangled state]] 

$$
|\Phi \rangle =\frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}(|0\rangle |0\rangle +|1\rangle |1\rangle )
$$

and double check we obtain the correct result for its reduced density operator as we did with the [[7.1 The reduced density operator#^94e446|partial trace]].

We want $\rho_{A}$, so we write the system in terms of qubit $B$ i.e. the second qubit. 

$$
|\Phi \rangle = \left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}|0\rangle \right)|0\rangle +\left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}|1\rangle  \right)|1\rangle 
$$

Then, the partial trace $\rho_{A}$ is just

$$
\rho_{A}=\left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}|0\rangle  \right)\left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}\langle  0| \right)+\left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}|1 \rangle  \right)\left( \frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}\langle 1| \right) = \frac{1}{2}|0\rangle \langle 0|+\frac{1}{2}|1\rangle \langle 1|=\frac{1}{2}I
$$

as we got before. 

As a final thing to say, the *reduced* density operator tells us information about *only the subsystem it is describing*. It throws away all information about the other system, which can be useful, but if we want to describe any aspect of the whole system i.e. correlations between the two subsystems - we *cannot* use the reduced density operator. We must use the full state $|\Psi\rangle$ and just the regular density operator. 