---
dg-publish: true
---
#Notes 

In [[7.1 The reduced density operator]] we saw that when we asked a question "what is the state of a subsystem", when the state is entangled, the correct answer was a *mixed* density operator. Here we will see that this is always true (we kind of already showed this in [[6opt. The Bloch Sphere]]). 

We can say that $|\Psi\rangle$ is **entangled** if *and only if* $\rho_{A}$ is a *mixed* density operator. 


> [!help] Recall
> Being *mixed* means that the density operator is a mixture of at least two pure states.

It is easy to check that a state is not entangled - it is a [[3.1 The Hilbert space of two-party quantum systems - the tensor product#^739f8e|product state]] - then the reduced density operator is a *pure state* - therefore *not* a mixed state. For example, a state

$$|\Psi\rangle=|\psi \rangle|\phi \rangle$$

is an arbitrary *product state* (i.e. of product form) has a reduced density operator for Alice of

$$
\rho_{A}=\text{tr} _{B}(|\psi \rangle \langle \psi|\otimes|\phi \rangle \langle \phi|)=\langle \phi|\phi \rangle |\psi \rangle \langle \psi|=|\psi \rangle \langle \psi|
$$

which is clearly a pure state.

It is not so easy to prove that if a state is entangled then the reduced density operator *must* be mixed - beyond the scope of this course in fact. We will use this result without proof.

How do we actually know if a reduced density operator is mixed or pure? Pure density operators correspond to projectors of the form $P=|\chi \rangle \langle\chi|$ for some state $|\chi \rangle$. Projectors have a nice property in that $P^2=P$. Then, we can say that for pure states $\rho_{A}^{2}=\rho_{A}$. If the reduced density operator is a mixed state, then $\rho_{A}^{2} \neq \rho_{A}$ [link problem sheet question that shows this]. 

Hence, the "mixedness" of a density operator can be determined by simply comparing $\rho^2$ with $\rho$. This leads us to a good way to determine entanglement. We can say that $|\Psi\rangle$ is entangled if *and only if* $\rho_{A}^{2}\neq \rho_{A}$.


> [!help] Note
> We could have done all of the above using $\rho_{B}$ and got to the same result - so either can be used in problems to show the same result.


> [!example] Example
> Consider the state $|\Phi \rangle= \sqrt{ \frac{3}{2} }|00\rangle+\sqrt{ \frac{1}{3} }|11\rangle$. Then
> $$\rho_{A}=\text{tr} _{B}(|\Phi \rangle \langle \Phi|)=\frac{2}{3}|0\rangle \langle 0|+\frac{1}{3}|1\rangle \langle 1|$$
> and 
> $$\rho_{A}^{2}=\frac{4}{9}|0\rangle \langle 0|+\frac{1}{9}|1\rangle \langle 1|\neq \rho_{A}$$
> and hence the state $|\Phi \rangle$ is entangled.
> 
