---
dg-publish: true
---
#Notes 

Imagine that Alice can send a qubit to Bob, but in fact, what she wants to send is a bit. This is easy. For example, she could encode the classical 0 as the quantum $|0\rangle$ and similarly 1 as $|1\rangle$, and send the qubit to Bob. Bob can then measure $Z=|0\rangle\langle0|-|1\rangle\langle1|$ to decide whether Alice sent $|0\rangle$ ($\langle 0 |Z|0\rangle=+1)$ or $|1\rangle$ ($\langle 1|Z|1\rangle=-1$). He knows this with certainty.

However, if Alice had wanted to send two bits (one of four possible messages), this doesn’t work any more. Since in $\mathbb{C} ^2$ there are not four orthogonal states to create a basis, Bob cannot measure with certainty what bit Alice intended to send.

However, these is a way to get around this, using the **super-dense coding protocol**, as follows.

Alice wants to send one of four messages to Bob (i.e. two bits), but can only send _one qubit_. She could send the qubit in either the state $|0\rangle$ or $|1\rangle$. If Bob measures $Z$, say, he learns what the state is, but only one bit is supplied (i.e. only one of two possible messages).

Instead, Alice and Bob pre-arranglee to share two particles (one held by Alice, and another by Bob) in the state

$$ \frac{1}{\sqrt 2} \Big [ |0\rangle_A|0\rangle_B+|1\rangle_A|1\rangle_B\Big ] $$

Then, Alice does one of four things to her particle (i.e. applies an operator $A\otimes I$, where $A$ is the “thing” that Alice does).

$$ \begin{aligned} \text{do nothing} \quad \rightarrow \quad I\otimes I \quad \rightarrow \quad & \frac{1}{\sqrt 2} \Big [ |0\rangle_A|0\rangle_B+|1\rangle_A|1\rangle_B\Big ]=|\Phi_I\rangle\\ \text{apply } X \quad \rightarrow \quad X\otimes I \quad \rightarrow \quad & \frac{1}{\sqrt 2} \Big [ |1\rangle_A|0\rangle_B+|0\rangle_A|1\rangle_B\Big ]=|\Phi_X\rangle\\\text{apply } Y \quad \rightarrow \quad Y\otimes I \quad \rightarrow \quad & \frac{1}{\sqrt 2} \Big [ |1\rangle_A|0\rangle_B-|0\rangle_A|1\rangle_B\Big ]=|\Phi_Y\rangle\\\text{apply } Z \quad \rightarrow \quad Z\otimes I \quad \rightarrow \quad & \frac{1}{\sqrt 2} \Big [ |0\rangle_A|0\rangle_B-|1\rangle_A|1\rangle_B\Big ]=|\Phi_Z\rangle\\\end{aligned} $$

Alice now sends her qubit. Bob now has two particles in one of four possible _orthogonal_ states. If he makes a measurement on an operator which has these four states _as its eigenstates_, then it is clear that he will discover _with certainty_ which state he has, and so which message Alice intended to send.

Hence Alice has effectively communicated two bits.