#Notes 

Before describing teleportation, let us revisit what happens when one part of a multi-party system is measured.

Consider a general two-qubit state.

$$ |\psi\rangle=\alpha_{00}|00\rangle+\alpha_{01}|01\rangle+\alpha_{10}|10\rangle+\alpha_{11}|11\rangle $$

Consider now that Alice measures $A$ on her particle, where $A$ is any operator with eigenstates $|0\rangle$ and $|1\rangle$ with different eigenvalues.

$$ A=\lambda_0|0\rangle\langle0|+\lambda_1|1\rangle\langle1| $$

This measurement is represented by

$$ A\otimes I=\lambda_0|0\rangle\langle0|\otimes I+\lambda_1|1\rangle\langle1|\otimes I:=\lambda_0P_0+\lambda_1P_1 $$

on the whole Hilbert space, where $P_0$ and $P_1$ are the projectors onto said space.

We want to know the state of the system after measurement, and so it is convenient to write it as

$$ |\psi\rangle=|0\rangle(\alpha_{00}|0\rangle+\alpha_{01}|1\rangle)+|1\rangle(\alpha_{10}|0\rangle+\alpha_{11}|1\rangle) $$

Thus we can see if Alice measures the state and gets result $\lambda_0$, we can compute

$$ P_0|\psi\rangle=|0\rangle\Big(\alpha_{00}|0\rangle+\alpha_{01}|1\rangle\Big) $$

and so the state after measurement is

$$ |\psi_\text{after}\rangle=\frac{|0\rangle(\alpha_{00}|0\rangle+\alpha_{01}|1\rangle)}{|||0\rangle(\alpha_{00}|0\rangle+\alpha_{01}|1\rangle)||}=\frac{|0\rangle(\alpha_{00}|0\rangle+\alpha_{01}|1\rangle)}{\sqrt{|\alpha_{00}|^2+|\alpha_{01}|^2}} $$

and the probability that this happens is

$$ \text{Prob}(\lambda_0)=|\alpha_{00}|^2+|\alpha_{01}|^2 $$

Thus, it is helpful to think of $|\psi\rangle$ as

$$ |\psi\rangle=|0\rangle|\eta_0\rangle+|1\rangle|\eta_1\rangle $$

where $|\eta_0\rangle=\alpha_{00}|0\rangle+|1\rangle$ and $|\eta_1\rangle=\alpha_{10}|0\rangle+\alpha_{11}|1\rangle$.

We can then read off that the state after the measurement will be up to normalisation

$$ |0\rangle|\eta_0\rangle \quad \text{or} \quad |1\rangle|\eta_1\rangle $$

depending on if we get $\lambda_0$ or $\lambda_1$. Notice also, that if Alice had got eigenvalue $\lambda_0$, she knows Bob’s qubit is in the state $|\eta_0\rangle$ after measurement, and similarly if she had got $\lambda_1$, then Bob’s qubit is in state $|\eta_1\rangle$ after measurement.

Let’s extend this situation where Alice has access to a four dimensional Hilbert space, and Bob has access to a qubit. Let Alice plan to measure a general non-degenerate operator

$$ A_4=\lambda_1|\phi_1\rangle\langle\phi_1|+\lambda_2|\phi_2\rangle\langle\phi_2|+\lambda_3|\phi_3\rangle\langle\phi_3|+\lambda_4|\phi_4\rangle\langle\phi_4| $$

where clearly all the $\phi's$ are eigenstates of $A_4$. They form an orthonormal basis.

In this case, we can write the whole system as

$$ |\Psi\rangle=|\phi_1\rangle|\tau_1\rangle+|\phi_2\rangle|\tau_2\rangle+|\phi_3\rangle|\tau_3\rangle+|\phi_4\rangle|\tau_4\rangle $$

where $|\tau_i\rangle, i\in[1,4]$ are the single qubit states that arise when we write out $|\Psi\rangle$ in this way. These single qubit states will not be orthogonal in general.

The advantage of writing out $|\Psi \rangle$ in this way is that we can read off what will happen when Alice measures $A_4$. The operator on the whole Hilbert space is $A_4\otimes I$. Thus, for example, the projector associated with the outcome $\lambda_2$ is

$$ |\phi_2\rangle\langle\phi_2|\otimes I $$

So we can read off that

$$ |\phi_2\rangle\langle\phi_2|\otimes I|\Psi\rangle=|\phi_2\rangle|\tau_2\rangle $$

and so the probability of getting $\lambda_2$ is

$$ |||\phi_2\rangle|\tau_2\rangle||^2 $$

and the state after the measurement is

$$ \frac{|\phi_2\rangle|\tau_2\rangle}{|||\phi_2\rangle|\tau_2\rangle||^2} $$

This way of writing $|\Psi\rangle$ is useful for what follows regarding quantum teleportation.

For this, lets imagine that Alice has an unknown state $|\psi\rangle=\alpha|0\rangle+\beta|1\rangle$ which she wishes to transmit to Bob. She cannot find out what the state is with certainty, nor can she copy it. Nonetheless, she can still transmit it to Bob.

Initially, Alice and Bob also share a maximally entangled state, thus the complete state of the system is

$$ |\psi\rangle|\text{shared}\rangle=\Big[\alpha|0\rangle_A+\beta|1\rangle_A\Big]\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\Big[|0\rangle_{A_1}|0\rangle_B+|1\rangle_{A_1}|1\rangle_B\Big] $$

We may rewrite this state as follows.

$$ \begin{gathered}\frac{1}{2\sqrt{2}}\left[|0\rangle_A|0\rangle_{A_1}+|1\rangle_A|1\rangle_{A_1}\right]\left[\alpha|0\rangle_B+\beta|1\rangle_B\right]\\+\frac{1}{2\sqrt{2}}\left[|0\rangle_A|0\rangle_{A_1}-|1\rangle_A|1\rangle_{A_1}\right]\left[\alpha|0\rangle_B-\beta|1\rangle_B\right]\\+\frac{1}{2\sqrt{2}}\left[|0\rangle_A|1\rangle_{A_1}+|1\rangle_A|0\rangle_{A_1}\right]\left[\beta|0\rangle_B+\alpha|1\rangle_B\right]\\+\frac{1}{2\sqrt{2}}\left[|0\rangle_A|1\rangle_{A_1}-|1\rangle_A|0\rangle_{A_1}\right]\left[-\beta|0\rangle_B+\alpha|1\rangle_B\right]\end{gathered} $$

Let Alice measure an operator on her four-dimensional Hilbert space with four non-degenerate eigenvalues $\lambda_1,\lambda_2,\lambda_3$ and $\lambda_4$, with associated eigenvectors

$$\begin{aligned}


\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\left[|0\rangle_A|0\rangle_{A_1}+|1\rangle_A|1\rangle_{A_1}\right]\quad\left(=|\Phi_I\rangle\right)\\\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\left[|0\rangle_A|0\rangle_{A_1}-|1\rangle_A|1\rangle_{A_1}\right]\quad\left(=|\Phi_Z\rangle\right)\\\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\left[|0\rangle_A|1\rangle_{A_1}+|1\rangle_A|0\rangle_{A_1}\right]\quad\left(=|\Phi_X\rangle\right)\\\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\left[|0\rangle_A|1\rangle_{A_1}-|1\rangle_A|0\rangle_{A_1}\right]\quad\left(=-|\Phi_Y\rangle\right) 
\end{aligned} $$

Note this is the same as in [[4.3 Super-dense coding]] (these are the **Bell states**, see [[Vectors]]).

Depending on which outcome $\lambda_{1\to 4}$ she finds, she knows what Bob’s state must be.

$$ \begin{aligned}

&\lambda_{1}\quad\leftrightarrow\quad\left[\alpha|0\rangle_B+\beta|1\rangle_B\right]\\&\lambda_{2}\quad\leftrightarrow\quad\left[\alpha|0\rangle_B-\beta|1\rangle_B\right]\\&\lambda_{3}\quad\leftrightarrow\quad\left[\beta|0\rangle_B+\alpha|1\rangle_B\right]\\&\lambda_{4}\quad\leftrightarrow\quad\left[-\beta|0\rangle_B+\alpha|1\rangle_B\right] 

\end{aligned}$$

Depending on which outcome she finds, she transmits one of four messages to Bob.

|_Outcome_|_Action_|
|---|---|
|$\lambda_1$|do nothing|
|$\lambda_2$|act with $Z$|
|$\lambda_3$|act with $X$|
|$\lambda_4$|act with $Y$|

In all cases, Bob’s state become simply $|\psi\rangle$.

And so, Alice has transmitted an unknown state $|\psi\rangle$ to Bob, without either of them knowing what the state was at any time.

It is very important to note here, and a common misconception, that the state does not appear instantaneously from Alice to Bob. We still have to transmit the two bits, which of course can only happen at the speed of light or slower. This is not “faster-than-light” communication.