---
dg-publish: true
---
Let’s begin with a number of preliminaries.

**Hadamard Operator**

$H$ is the operator on $\mathbb{C}^2$ defined by

$$ H|0\rangle=|+\rangle, \quad H|1\rangle=|-\rangle $$

(see [[Vectors]] for definitions).

We can see that $H^2=I$, and that on $\mathbb{C}^2\otimes \mathbb{C}^2$

$$ H\otimes H|00\rangle=\frac12 \Big (|00\rangle+|01\rangle+|10\rangle+|11\rangle\Big ) $$

and when acting on the Hilbert space of $n$ qubits

$$ H\otimes H\otimes \dots\otimes H |00\dots0\rangle=\frac{1}{\sqrt{2^n}}\sum_{\text{all } x}|x\rangle $$

**Measuring in the Computational Basis**

The operator $C$ on $\mathbb{C}^2$ is defined as

$$ C=|1\rangle\langle1| $$

and has eigenvalues 0 and 1, corresponding to $|0\rangle$ and $|1\rangle$. If the state is one of the basis states i.e. $|0\rangle$ or $|1\rangle$, and $C$ is measured on it, we get back 0 or 1 respectively. Thus $C$ “reads out” which of the two basis states we have.

It is helpful to think of $C$ written out as $0|0\rangle\langle0|+1|1\rangle\langle1|$.

Let’s say we have a two qubit state

$$ |\Psi\rangle=\sum_{j,k=0}^1 \alpha_{jk}|jk\rangle $$

then we measure both qubits with $C$. The probability that we get a zero for the first qubit and 0 for the second qubit is $|\alpha_{00}|^2$ since

$$ \mathrm{Prob}\left(0\text{ on first qubit}\right)=|||0\rangle\langle0|\otimes I|\Psi\rangle||^2:=q_1 $$

and the [[2.1 States, evolution and measurement|state after the measurement]] is

$$ \frac{|0\rangle\langle0|\otimes I|\Psi\rangle}{|||0\rangle\langle0|\otimes I|\Psi\rangle||} $$

Thus

$$ \begin{aligned}&\mathrm{Prob}\left(0\text{ on second qubit given 0 on first qubit}\right)\\&=\quad||I\otimes|0\rangle\langle0|\left(\frac{|0\rangle\langle0|\otimes I|\Psi\rangle}{|||0\rangle\langle0|\otimes I|\Psi\rangle||}\right)||^2\\&=\quad\frac{|||0\rangle\langle0|\otimes|0\rangle\langle0||\Psi\rangle||^2}{|||0\rangle\langle0|\otimes I|\Psi\rangle||^2}:=q_2\end{aligned} $$

Thus the probability that we get 0 on the first qubit and 0 on the second qubit is

$$ q_1q_2=|||0\rangle\langle0|\otimes|0\rangle\langle 0|\Psi\rangle||^2=|\alpha_{00}|^2 $$

**Classical Functions**

These functions provide a system whereby $\{0,1\}^n\mapsto\{0,1\}$. So we can take an $2^n$ dimensional system down into $2$ dimensions.

An example in $n=2$ is $f_1$ defined by

$$ f_1(00)=1, \quad f_1(01)=0,\quad f_1(10)=1,\quad f_1(11)=0 $$

We might write this as $f_1(x_1,x_2)=1+x_2 \text{ mod }2$, or perhaps as $f_1(x_1,x_2)=1\oplus x_2$, where $\oplus$ is the XOR symbol (either but not both).

**Computing Functions in Parallel**

Given an $f \: : \: \{0,1\}^n \mapsto \{0,1\}$, we can construct a unitary operator acting on $n+1$ qubits

$$ U_f|x\rangle|y\rangle := |x\rangle|y \oplus f(x)\rangle $$

$|x\rangle$ denotes on of the $2^n$ basis states for $\mathbb{C} ^{2^n}$ i.e. $|00\dots0\rangle$ to $|11\dots1\rangle$, and $|y\rangle$ is one of the two basis states for $\mathbb{C}^2$.

Consider the classical function $f_1$ from above. We can write this as

$$ U_{f_1}|00\rangle|0\rangle=|00\rangle|1\rangle,\quad U_{f_1}|00\rangle|1\rangle=|00\rangle|0\rangle,\quad U_{f_1}|11\rangle|1\rangle=|11\rangle|1\rangle \quad \mathrm{~etc.}. $$

where we can see for the first one that $U_{f_1}|x\rangle|y\rangle=U_{f_1}|00\rangle|0\rangle=|x\rangle|y\oplus f(x)\rangle=|00\rangle|0 \oplus f(00)\rangle=|00\rangle|0\oplus 1\rangle=|00\rangle|1\rangle$, and so on for the rest.

Does $U_{f}$ take an orthonormal basis to an orthonormal basis? Lets see by computing the inner product of $U_f|x_2\rangle|y_2\rangle$ with $U_f|x_1\rangle|y_1\rangle$. The inner product is

$$ \Big (\langle x_2| \langle y_2 \oplus f(x_2) \Big )\Big (|x_1\rangle|y_2\oplus f(x_1)\Big ) $$

Recalling that $\langle x_2|x_1\rangle =\delta_{x_1,x_2}$, we can say

$$ \begin{aligned}\Big (\langle x_2| \langle y_2 \oplus f_2(x_2) \Big )\Big (|x_1\rangle|y_2\oplus f(x_1)\Big ) &= \delta _{x_1,x_2} \langle y_2 \oplus f(x_2)|y_1\oplus f(x_1)\rangle \\ & =\delta_{x_1,x_2}\langle y_2 \oplus f(x_1)|y_1\oplus f(x_1)\rangle\\ &=\delta_{x_1,x_2}\langle y_2|y_1\rangle \\ &= \delta _{x_1,x_2}\delta _{y_1,y_2}\\ &=\langle x_2|\langle y_2|y_1\rangle|x_1\rangle\end{aligned}

$$

~={Grey} *When we seemingly randomly switch $x_{2}$ to $x_{1}$, it is because of the delta function - the only non zero case is when $x_{1}=x_{2}$ and so we are able to do this fine.=~*

as required.

We note that any operator of the form

$$ \sum^{d-1}_{j=0}|e_j\rangle\langle f_j| $$

where $\{|e_j\rangle\}$ and $\{|f_j\rangle\}$ are two orthonormal bases of $\mathbb{C}^d$, _is unitary_. The proof above that $U_f$ takes an orthonormal basis to an orthonormal basis shows that $U_f$ is indeed of this form, and so is unitary.

A key property of $U_f$ is that it allows us to compute function in parallel.

$$ U_f \bigg ( \frac{1}{\sqrt{2^n}} \sum _x |x\rangle \bigg )|0\rangle=\bigg (\frac{1}{\sqrt{2^n}}\sum_x|x\rangle|f(x)\rangle\bigg ) $$

Finally, we note that

$$ \begin{aligned} U_f|x\rangle|-\rangle&= U_f|x\rangle\bigg (\frac{|0\rangle - |1\rangle}{\sqrt 2}\bigg ) \\ &= \frac{1}{\sqrt2}|x\rangle \Big ( |f(x)\rangle - |f(x)\oplus 1\rangle\Big ) \\ &= \begin{cases} |x\rangle|-\rangle & \text{if } f(x)=0 \\ -|x\rangle|-\rangle & \text{if }f(x)=1\end{cases} \\ &= (-1)^{f(x)}|x\rangle|-\rangle\end{aligned} $$

**Trits**

A **trit** is an object that can be in one of _three_ states $\{0,1,2\}$. We can generalise the ideas concerning bits to trits.

We can think of functions from trits to trits

$$ f\: : \: \{0,1,2\} \mapsto \{0,1,2\} $$

such as

$$\begin{aligned}

&f_1(0)=1,\quad f_1(1)=1,\quad f_1(2)=1\\&f_2(0)=0,\quad f_2(1)=1,\quad f_2(2)=1\\&f_3(0)=2,\quad f_3(1)=0,\quad f_3(2)=0 

\end{aligned} $$

We can rewrite these functions as

$$ f_1(x)=1, \quad f_2(x)=x^2 \: \text{mod} \: 3, \quad f_3(x)=(x^2+2)\: \text{mod} \: 3 $$

Consider also the function $f_4(x)=3x^2 \: \text{mod} \: 3$. Because of the $\text{mod} \: 3$, in fact this function is $f_4(x)=0$ (since the first part is always a multiple of 3).

Just as with bits to bits, we can associate a unitary operator with classical functions from trits to trits. It is an operator on $\mathbb{C}^3\otimes \mathbb{C}^3$ defined as

$$ U_f|x\rangle|y\rangle=|x\rangle|y+ f(x) \: \text{mod}\: 3\rangle $$

where $x,y \in \{0,1,2 \}$.