---
noteID: e530a33f-e05a-4f14-9257-206a512dfc90
dg-publish: true
---
#Notes 

**Deutsch's problem** is: given a black box function $f:\{0,1\}\to\{0,1\}$, compute $f(0) \oplus f(1)$.

Remember that $\oplus$ is like an `XOR` gate from [[4.5 Quantum computation - introduction]].

The four functions are given in the table below.

|                   | $f_1(x)$ | $f_2(x)$ | $f_3(x)$ | $f_4(x)$ |
| ----------------- | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| $x=0$             | 0        | 0        | 1        | 1        |
| $x=1$             | 0        | 1        | 0        | 1        |
| $f(0)\oplus f(1)$ | 0        | 1        | 1        | 0        |

If this were a classical black box function, we would need two queries. Let's run a quick example algorithm.

Say we inserted $0$ into the black box, and find $f(0)=0$. This means that we could either have $f_{1}$ or $f_{2}$ in the table above. This has not narrowed it down to one option, and so we would also have to insert $1$ into the black box, say finding $f(1)=1$, and so only now can we know that the true function is $f_{2}$, and that $f_{2}(0)\oplus f_{2}(1)=1$. 

We can that if we had the option of $f_{2}$ or $f_{3}$, then $f(0)\oplus f(1)=1$ for both, and so we *would be able to do this with just one input* (remember that the only aim is to find out what $f(0)\oplus f(1)$ is, not which function we are using), however there is no way to do this classically, because these functions are independent of each other (i.e. produce opposite outputs for the same input).

How can we do this using qubits? We will use **Deutsch's algorithm** as follows. The aim is to find out if $f(0)\oplus f(1)=0$ or $f(0)\oplus f(1)=1$.

1. Put 2 qubits into the state $|0\rangle|0\rangle$.
2. Apply $I\otimes X$. 
3. Apply $H\otimes H$.
4. Apply $U_{f}$.
5. Apply $H\otimes I$.
6. Measure the first qubit in the computational basis. If the value is 0, then $f_{0}\oplus f_{1}=0$, if the value is 1, then $f_{0}\oplus f_{1}=1$.

This all seems very arbitrary, so let's do some analysis. 

We first put the qubits in the state $|0\rangle|0\rangle$.

Then we apply $I\otimes X$. This is 

$$
I\otimes X|0\rangle|{0}\rangle=I\otimes (|0\rangle\langle 1|+|1\rangle\langle 0|)|0\rangle|0\rangle=|0\rangle|1\rangle
$$

We then apply $H\otimes H$, recalling from [[4.5 Quantum computation - introduction]] that $H|0\rangle=|+\rangle, \, H|1\rangle=|-\rangle$. 

$$
H\otimes H|0\rangle|1\rangle=|+\rangle|-\rangle=\left( \frac{{|0\rangle+|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)\left( \frac{{|0\rangle-|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)
$$


We then need to apply $U_{f}$. We can recall again from [[4.5 Quantum computation - introduction]] that 

$$
U_{f}|x\rangle\left( \frac{{|0\rangle-|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)=(-1)^{f(x)}|x\rangle\left( \frac{{|0\rangle-|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)
$$

and so the state becomes 

$$
U_{f}|+\rangle|-\rangle = \frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}U_{f}(|0\rangle+|1\rangle)\left(\frac{|0\rangle-|1\rangle}{\sqrt{ 2 }}\right) =\frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}((-1)^{f(0)}|0\rangle+(-1)^{f(1)}|1\rangle)\left(\frac{|0\rangle-|1\rangle}{\sqrt{ 2 }}\right) 
$$
~={Grey}Here we have split up the $|+\rangle$ into is $|0\rangle$ and $|1\rangle$ components, so we can set $|x\rangle=|0\rangle$ and $|x\rangle=|1\rangle$ separately. This allows us to evaluate $U_{f}$ on the whole function as if it were two, combining them together at the end.=~

If $f(0)\oplus f(1)=1$ then *either* $f(0)$ or $f(1)$ is 1, with the other being zero. In this case, we have 

$$
\frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}((-1)^{f(0)}|0\rangle+(-1)^{f(1)}|1\rangle)=
\begin{cases}
\frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}(|0\rangle-|1\rangle)=|-\rangle & \text{if } f(0)=0,\,f(1)=1 \\
\frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}(-|0\rangle+|1\rangle)=-|-\rangle & \text{if } f(0)=1, \, f(1)=0
\end{cases}
$$

If $f(0)\oplus f(1)=0$ then *both* $f(0)$ and $f(1)$ are 0 or 1. In this case, we have 

$$
\frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}((-1)^{f(0)}|0\rangle+(-1)^{f(1)}|1\rangle)=
\begin{cases}
\frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}(|0\rangle+|1\rangle)=|+\rangle & \text{if } f(0)=0,\,f(1)=0 \\
\frac{1}{\sqrt{ 2 }}(-|0\rangle-|1\rangle)=-|+\rangle & \text{if } f(0)=1, \, f(1)=1
\end{cases}
$$

And so our output of $U_{f}|+\rangle|-\rangle$ can clearly be written as 

$$
U_{f}|+\rangle|-\rangle=\begin{cases}
\pm|+\rangle|-\rangle & \text{if } f(0)\oplus f(1)=0  \\
\pm|-\rangle|-\rangle & \text{if } f(0)\oplus f(1)=1
\end{cases}
$$

Thus these two cases can be distinguished clearly! We should however measure in the computational basis.  

We apply $H\otimes I$ and the state becomes

$$
H\otimes I \begin{cases}
\pm|+\rangle|-\rangle & \text{if } f(0)\oplus f(1)=0  \\
\pm|-\rangle|-\rangle & \text{if } f(0)\oplus f(1)=1
\end{cases} =\begin{cases}
\pm|0\rangle|-\rangle & \text{if } f(0)\oplus f(1)=0  \\
\pm|1\rangle|-\rangle & \text{if } f(0)\oplus f(1)=1
\end{cases}
$$

and so clearly if we measure $|0\rangle$, we know $f(0)\oplus f(1)=0$ and similarly if we measure $|1\rangle$, we know $f(0)\oplus f(1)=1$.

