---
dg-publish: true
---
#Notes 

[[4.6 Deutsch's problem|Deutsch's problem]] can be generalised to give an *exponential* separation between the number of queries on a classical computer versus the number on a quantum computer. 

As opposed to before, we now consider functions of form $f:\{0,1\}^{n}\mapsto\{0,1\}$. We are given the "promise" that the function is constant (the same value on all inputs) or "balanced" (returns 0 on exactly half the inputs, 1 on the others).

The Deutsch-Josza problem is that we have a black box for an unknown function that is *promised to either be constant or balanced*. We only wish to determine which type it is, *with certainty*.

With $n=2$, we can give some examples of functions $f:\{0,1\}^2\mapsto\{0,1\}$.


|        | $f_0(x)$ | $f_1(x)$ | $f_2(x)$ | $f_3(x)$ |
| ------ | -------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
| $x=00$ | 1        | 0        | 1        | 1        |
| $x=01$ | 1        | 1        | 1        | 0        |
| $x=10$ | 1        | 1        | 0        | 0        |
| $x=11$ | 1        | 0        | 0        | 0        |
|        | constant | balanced | balanced | neither  |

These of course are not the only examples of functions that could exist, but we can see how the definitions of *constant* and *balanced* apply, and how it is possible for neither to be true.

For $n=2$ there are two constant functions i.e. $f(x)=0$ for all $x$ or $f(x)=1$ for all $x$, and six balanced functions (the two zeros can be any pair, and there are six possible ways to arrange them).

If we have a classical black box for the function, we need $2^{n-1}+1$ queries in the worst case. To see this, consider inputting $2^{n-1}$ different values of $x$, if it turns out they all have $f(x)=0$, then we still don't know if the function is constant or balanced (in the $n=2$ case, this is clear - $2^{2-1}=2$ and if we only input twice and get 0 both times, then we *might* get 1 on the next one and lose the possibility of a constant function).

So how do we do the *quantum* Deutsch-Josza algorithm? The steps are as follows. 

1. Put $n+1$ qubits into the state $|0\rangle^{\otimes n}|0\rangle$.
2. Apply $I^{\otimes n}\otimes X$.
3. Apply $H^{\otimes n}\otimes H$.
4. Apply $U_{f}$.
5. Apply $H^{\otimes n}\otimes I$.
6. Measure the first $n$ qubits in the computational basis. If all values are 0 then the function $f$ was constant. Otherwise, the function was balanced. 

This seems very similar to [[4.6 Deutsch's problem|Deutsch's algorithm]], just scaled up to more qubits. Let's do some analysis. 

Firstly, we have $n+1$ qubits in the state $|0\rangle^{\otimes n}|0\rangle$. This is the same as saying 

$$
|\underbrace{000 \dots 000}_{n\text{ times}}\rangle|0\rangle  
$$

and so we clearly have $n+1$ qubits overall. 

We then apply $I^{\otimes n}\otimes X$ (or $\underbrace{ I\otimes I\otimes I\otimes\dots \otimes I }_{ n \text{ times} }\otimes X$) to this value.

$$
I^{\otimes n}\otimes X|0\rangle^{\otimes n}|0\rangle=|0\rangle^{\otimes n}|1\rangle 
$$

We then need to apply $H^{\otimes n}\otimes H$ and so the state becomes 

$$
H^{\otimes n}\otimes H|0\rangle^{\otimes n}|1\rangle=\underbrace{ \left( \frac{{|0\rangle+|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)\left( \frac{{|0\rangle+|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)\dots\left( \frac{{|0\rangle+|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right) }_{ n \text{ times} }\left( \frac{{|0\rangle-|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)
$$

We can rewrite this in a more convenient way:

$$
\frac{1}{2^{n / 2}}\sum_{x}|x\rangle\left( \frac{{|0\rangle-|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)
$$
~={Grey}The factor out the front is clear (this is just combining all the $\sqrt{ 2 }$s in the previous equation). The sum simply comes from the sum over the computational basis. Here, it is a basis that spans from $|000\dots 0\rangle$ to $|111\dots 1\rangle$ and every possible state in-between. If you look at the product we have at the top (not including the final term, this is a factor in the sum), we will actually end up with all of these states if we evaluated it, so it is fair to sum over all of them and say that that is equal.=~

Now we want to apply $U_{f}$. This can be done by remembering that 

$$
U_{f}|x\rangle\left( \frac{{|0\rangle-|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)=(-1)^{f(x)}|x\rangle\left( \frac{{|0\rangle-|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)
$$

(see [[4.5 Quantum computation - introduction]]) and so the state becomes 

$$
\frac{1}{2^{n / 2}}\sum_{x}(-1)^{f(x)}|x\rangle\left( \frac{{|0\rangle-|1\rangle}}{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)
$$
~={Grey}Here we simply evaluate $U_{f}$ for every term in the sum, and then "put them back" into the sum again afterwards.=~

Note, if we let 

$$
|f\rangle= \frac{1}{2^{n / 2}}\sum_{x}(-1)^{f(x)}|x\rangle
$$

then the states $|f\rangle$ for constant functions are all orthogonal to those for balanced functions. Thus there will be a way of disguising between the two sets by measurement. To see this, if we have a constant function, then all $f(x)=0$ *or* all $f(x)=1$. This means we will either have 

$$
|f_{0}\rangle=\frac{1}{2^{n / 2}}\sum_{x}|x\rangle\quad\text{or}\quad|f_{1}\rangle=-\frac{1}{2^{n / 2}}\sum_{x}|x\rangle
$$

If we have a balanced function, half of these $f(x)$s will be positive and half will be negative. And so we will of course be orthogonal to functions which are entirely positive or entirely negative.

We want to take a measurement in the computational basis, and so we will apply $H^{\otimes n}\otimes I$ to our state, or simply $H^{\otimes n}$ to $|f\rangle$. 

If $f$ is constant, we have one of the two forms provided above. Hence

$$
H^{\otimes n}|f_{\text{constant}}\rangle=\pm|0\rangle^{\otimes n}
$$
~={Grey}To see this properly, it is actually clearer to rewrite the sum again as $\sum_{x}|x\rangle=|+++\dots+\rangle$ (see above), and use the fact that $H|+\rangle=|0\rangle$ ($H$ is **self-inverse**).=~

If $f$ is balanced, then we don't necessarily know $(-1)^{f(x)}$. We can write

$$
H^{\otimes n}|f\rangle=\sum_{x}a_{x}|x\rangle
$$

We can then say that it must be the case that $a_{00\dots 0}=0$, i.e. the sum of all coefficients must be zero for a balanced function (which makes sense if half are +1 and the other half are -1). 

Then we measure the first $n$ qubits in the computational basis. If all the values are zero, then the $f$ was constant. Otherwise, the function was balanced. We cannot get zero for every measurement if $f$ was balanced - we must get at least one 1 on one of the qubits. This is because the probability of getting the string $x$ is $|a_{x}|^2$, and we already said that $a_{00\dots 0}=0$.

The reason it can't be neither is because *we said it couldn't*. At the start, we made a "promise" that $f$ was either balanced $or$ constant. 