#Notes 

**The Rules of Quantum Mechanics**

1. *_States_* of a system are described by _normalized_ vectors in _Hilbert space_. Two vectors differing by an overall phase are equivalent in terms of measurement (i.e. $|\psi_1\rangle=|\psi_2\rangle$ if $|\psi_1\rangle=e^{i\theta}|\psi_2\rangle$). We say that quantum states correspond to **rays** in Hilbert space.
2. _Evolutions_ of a system are described by unitary operators.
3. _Observables_ correspond to self-adjoint/Hermitian operators. Furthermore, when a measurement corresponding to an operator $A$ is made, the numerical outcome of the measurement is an eigenvalue of $A$, $\lambda_\alpha$, and immediately after the measurement, the state of the system is the associated eigenstate.

---

To see how 3 works, let us write $A$ in its spectral decomposition as

$$ A=\sum_{\lambda_{\alpha},\text{distinct}} \lambda _\alpha P_\alpha $$

If the state of the system before measurement is $|\psi\rangle$, then the probability that the eigenvalue $\lambda_\alpha$ is observed is

$$ \text{Prob}(\lambda_\alpha)=|| P_\alpha|\psi\rangle||^2=\langle \psi|P_\alpha P_\alpha|\psi\rangle=\langle \psi|P_\alpha|\psi\rangle $$

where we recall that since $P_\alpha$ is a projection operator, it satisfies $P^*_\alpha=P_\alpha$ and $P^2_\alpha=P_\alpha$.

The normalized state _after the measurement_ is

$$ |\psi_{\text{after}}\rangle=\frac{P_\alpha|\psi\rangle}{\big [\langle\psi|P_\alpha|\psi\rangle \big]^{1/2}} $$

The **expected value** of the observable $A$ in the state $|\psi\rangle$ is

$$ \langle \psi|A|\psi\rangle=\sum_{\alpha} \lambda _\alpha \text{Prob}(\lambda _{\alpha}) $$

> [!Example]
> Let the state before a measurement be $|\psi\rangle=|0\rangle \in \mathbb{C}^2$, and let us measure the observable $X$. As we have calculated earlier, the eigenvalues of $X$ are $\pm1$, with associated projectors
> 
> $$ P_+=|+\rangle\langle+|, \quad P_-=|-\rangle\langle -| $$
> 
> Thus the spectral decomposition of $X$ is
> 
> $$ X=|+\rangle\langle+|-|-\rangle\langle-|=P_+-P_- $$
> 
> where we note
> 
> $$ |+\rangle=\frac{|0\rangle+|1\rangle}{\sqrt2},\quad |-\rangle=\frac{|0\rangle-|1\rangle}{\sqrt2} $$
> 
> Thus, the probability of the measurement outcome being $+1$ is
> 
> $$ \langle\psi| P_+|\psi\rangle =\langle0|\big [|+\rangle\langle+|\big]|0\rangle=\frac12 $$
> 
> and the state immediately after the measurement is
> 
> $$ |\psi_{\text{after}}\rangle=\frac{P_\alpha|\psi\rangle}{\big [\langle\psi|P_\alpha|\psi\rangle \big]^{1/2}}=|+\rangle $$
> 
> We can see that by measuring an outcome, we have essentially “collapsed” the possibility of the other outcomes existing.



We could also interpret rule 3 as follows. Consider a Hermitian operator $A$ on $\mathbb{C}^n$ and its eigenvectors $|v_i\rangle$, $i=0,\dotsm,n-1$ (which form an orthonormal basis for $\mathbb{C}^n$). Let us write the state $|\psi\rangle$ using the basis.

$$ |\psi\rangle=\sum_{i=0}^{n-1}a_i|v_i\rangle $$

Consider now the eigenspace, of say dimension $k$, associated to the eigenvalue $\lambda_\alpha$. Here, the associated projector would be

$$ P_\alpha=\sum^{k-1}_{i=0}|v_i\rangle\langle v_i| $$

where we have labelled the basis elements $|v_i\rangle$ such that $P_{\alpha}$ projects onto the first $k$ eigenvectors.

The probability that the eigenvalue $\lambda _\alpha$ is found when $A$ is measured is

$$ \begin{aligned} \langle\psi|P_\alpha|\psi\rangle&=\bigg [ \sum_{i=0}^{n-1}a^*_i\langle v_i| \bigg]\bigg [ \sum_{j=0}^{k-1}|v_j\rangle\langle v_j| \bigg]\bigg [ \sum_{m=0}^{n-1}a_m| v_m\rangle \bigg]\\

&=\bigg [ \sum_{i=0}^{n-1}a^*_i\langle v_i| \bigg]\bigg [ \sum_{m=0}^{k-1}a_m|v_m\rangle \bigg] 

\\&=\sum^{k-1}_{m=0}|a_m|^2 \end{aligned}

 $$

*We can go from the second to the third line as $\langle v_{i}|v_{m}\rangle = \delta_{im}$*.

The complex numbers $a_i$ are called **probability amplitudes**.



> [!Example]
> 
> In the example above, we might instead write the state $|0\rangle$ in terms of the eigenstates of $X$ as
> 
> $$ |0\rangle=\frac1{\sqrt2}\bigg[|+\rangle+|-\rangle\bigg] $$
> 
> Thus the probability of finding the eigenvalue $+1$ after measurement is $\big|\frac{1}{\sqrt2}\big|^2=\frac{1}{2}$ as before.
> 
> 

When computing what happens when the outcome $\lambda$ occurs when making a measurement of an operator $A$ on the state $|\psi\rangle$, it is often useful to compute

$$ P|\psi\rangle $$

where $P$ is the projection operator associated to $\lambda$ in the spectral decomposition of the measurement operator. This is because the probability that this outcome occurred is $||P|\psi\rangle||^2$ and the state after the measurement is

$$ \frac{P|\psi\rangle}{||P|\psi||^2} $$

We note that the measurement typically changes the state. However, the state is unchanged if $|\psi\rangle$ is an eigenstate of the measurement operator $A$. If the state is an eigenstate of $A$ with eigenvalue $\lambda_j$, then the value obtained upon measuring $A$ is $\lambda_j$ with certainty.


> [!Example]
> Consider the general state $|\psi\rangle=\alpha |0\rangle+\beta|1\rangle$ in $\mathbb{C} ^2$. Let us measure $Z=|0\rangle\langle0|-|1\rangle\langle1|$. Then, the probability of getting the eigenvalue $\lambda=+1$ is $||Z|\psi\rangle||^2=|\alpha|^2$. In this case, the state after measurement is $|0\rangle$. Similarly, the probability of getting the eigenvalue $\lambda=-1$ is $|\beta|^2$, and in this case the state after measurement is $|1\rangle$.
> 
> In the case that the state was $|0\rangle$ or $|1\rangle$, we get the associated eigenvalue $+1$ or $-1$ respectively _with certainty_. As well as this, the state remains unchangleed after measurement. We can see clearly that for $\alpha,\beta\neq 0,1\neq 1,0$, their values will changlee after measurement.

