---
dg-publish: true
---
#Notes 

See [[5.1 The density operator]].

### Properties

We say that the density operator $\rho$ is a *mixture* of the pure states $|\psi_{n}\rangle$, where each state is "mixed in" with probability $p_{n}$.

As seen in the original example in [[5.1 The density operator]], the states $|\psi_{n}\rangle$ *do not need to be orthogonal*. This means that we can mix states which themselves are in superpositions. In the original example, $|+\rangle$ is a superposition of $|0\rangle$ and $|1\rangle$, and there is no problem mixing this with $|0\rangle$.

The number of states being mixed into a density operator is *arbitrary*. It could be as few as one state, or any large number.

Different sources can lead to *the same density operator*. It is possible for two different ensembles $\{|\psi_{n}\rangle,p_{n}\};n\in \{1,\dots,N\}$ and $\{|\phi_{m}\rangle,q_{m}\};m\in\{1,\dots,M\}$, corresponding to two different ensembles, to lead to the same density operator such that 
 $$
\sum_{n=1}^{N}p_{n}|\psi_{n}\rangle \langle \psi_{n}|=\sum_{m=1}^{M}q_{m}|\phi_{m}\rangle \langle \phi_{m}|
$$


> [!Example] Example
> Consider a source which emits the eigenstates of $Z$, $|0\rangle$ and $|1\rangle$, with equal probability. The density operator of the source is then
> $$\rho=\frac{1}{2}|0\rangle \langle 0|+\frac{1}{2}|1\rangle \langle 1|$$
> Consider now a second source, which emits the eigenstates of $X$, $|+\rangle$ and $|-\rangle$, with equal probability. The density operator describing this source is then 
> $$\begin{align}
\rho &= \frac{1}{2}|+\rangle \langle  +| + \frac{1}{2} |- \rangle \langle -| \\
 \\
&=\frac{1}{2} \left( \frac{|0\rangle +|1\rangle }{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)\left( \frac{|0\rangle +|1\rangle }{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right) + \frac{1}{2}\left( \frac{|0\rangle -|1\rangle }{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right)\left( \frac{|0\rangle -|1\rangle }{\sqrt{ 2 }} \right) \\
 \\
&=\frac{1}{4} |0\rangle \langle 0|+\frac{1}{4}|0\rangle \langle 1|+\frac{1}{4}|1\rangle \langle 0| + \frac{1}{4}|1\rangle \langle 1|+\frac{1}{4}|0\rangle \langle 0|-\frac{1}{4}|0\rangle \langle 1|-\frac{1}{4}|1\rangle \langle 0|+\frac{1}{4}|1\rangle \langle 1| \\
 \\
&=\frac{1}{2}|0\rangle \langle 0|+\frac{1}{2}|1\rangle \langle 1|
\end{align}$$
which is exactly equal to the other density operator, which arose from a different source.

Crucially, we saw in [[5.1 The density operator]] that if we make any measurement, the probabilities of the outcomes depend *only* on the density operator of the source. This has a very important implication - two sources which lead to the same density operator are **indistinguishable**. This is what quantum non-locality is built on. 

The opposite is also true - if two sources have different density operators, $\rho$ and $\sigma$, then it is *always* possible to find an operator $A$ which leads to different probabilities when measured on $\rho$ compared to when measured on $\sigma$, and hence can be used to distinguish between the two sources. 

Here we have introduced the density operator in order to describe within quantum theory a situation where a source emits states probabilistically. However, we might instead use the formalism of density operators to describe the old situation as well, when a source emits the state $|\psi \rangle$. In this case, the density operator is simple

$$
\rho=|\psi \rangle \langle \psi|
$$

i.e. it is the projector onto the state $|\psi \rangle$. In this case, we refer to it as a **pure state**. Conversely, when the sources emits two or more states, meaning the density operator is not a pure state, then we call it a **mixed state**.

One advantage of using the density operator, even to describe pure states, is that it automatically takes care of the unphysical global phase of a quantum state. In particular, recall that $|\psi \rangle$ and $|\psi'\rangle=e^{i\theta}|\psi \rangle$ correspond to the same physical state. At the level of density operators

$$
\rho'=e^{i\theta}|\psi \rangle \langle \psi|e^{-i\theta}=|\psi \rangle \langle \psi|=\rho
$$

The other extreme type of density operator is where we mix with uniform probability a complete basis of orthonormal states. For example, for a qubit, if the source emits $|0\rangle$ and $|1\rangle$, or $|+\rangle$ and $|-\rangle$ with equal probability.

More generally, for a $d$-level system, if the source emits one of $d$ states $|e_{k}\rangle$ with probability $\frac{1}{d}$, then

$$
\rho=\frac{1}{d}\sum_{k}|e_{k}\rangle \langle e_{k}|=\frac{1}{d}I
$$
where $|e_{k}\rangle$ form an orthonormal basis in a Hilbert space of dimension $d$. This state is known as the **maximally mixed state** and is the density operator analogue of a uniform probability distribution. ^53c5eb

### Mathematical features

There are a few mathematical features of a density operator $\rho$.

- $\rho$ is Hermitian.
- $\rho$ is a *positive operator*. This means that the density operator always leads to positive probabilities i.e. all the eigenvalues are non-negative (this should be obvious because the eigenvalues themselves are probabilities that we encode in $\rho$).
  This is equivalent to saying $\langle u|\rho|u\rangle \geq 0$ for all $|u\rangle$, which we can verify
  $$
\langle u|\rho|u\rangle =\sum_{n}p_{n}\langle u|\psi_{n}\rangle \langle \psi_{n}|u\rangle =\sum_{n}p_{n}|\langle \psi_{n}|u\rangle|^{2}\geq 0
   $$
- $\rho$ has a *unit trace*, which encodes both the normalisation of the quantum states, and the probabilities.
  $$ 
\begin{align}
\text{tr}\rho &= \text{tr}\left( \sum_{n}p_{n}|\psi_{n}\rangle \langle \psi_{n}| \right) \\
 \\
&=\sum_{n}p_{n}\langle \psi_{n}|\psi_{n}\rangle  \\
 \\
 & =\sum_{n}p_{n}=1
\end{align}
   $$
- Any positive operator with unit trace corresponds to a valid density operator, and can be realised by *at least* one source. In particular, $\rho$ can always be written in diagonal form, in terms of eigenvalues and eigenvectors as 
$$
\rho=\sum_{n} \lambda_{n}|v_{n}\rangle \langle v_{n}|
$$
  such that $\lambda_{n} \geq 0$, $\sum_{n}\lambda_{n}=1$ and $\langle v_{m}|v_{n}\rangle=\delta_{m,n}$. Thus, a source that emits the states $|v_{n}\rangle$ with a probability $\lambda_{n}$ will be described by such a density operator. 

- As with any operator, it can sometimes be useful to represent the density operator as a matrix in a particular basis. In this context, the density operator is referred to as a **density matrix**. 
  As an example, for a qubit, the density operator $\rho$ is represented as a matrix in the standard basis as
$$
\rho = \begin{pmatrix}
\langle 0|\rho|0\rangle  & \langle 0|\rho|1\rangle  \\
\langle 1|\rho|0\rangle  & \langle 1|\rho|1\rangle 
\end{pmatrix}
$$

  This is particularly useful when finding eigenvectors and eigenvalues of $\rho$.
