---
dg-publish: true
---
#Notes 

The trace has a number of equivalent representations, each of which can prove useful. 


> [!info] Alternative forms of the trace
> First consider the trace of an arbitrary operator $A$. We can write this as$$
\begin{align}
\text{tr}(A)=\text{tr}(AI) &= \text{tr}\left( A \sum_{j}|j\rangle \langle  j| \right) \\
 \\
&= \sum_{j}\text{tr}(A|j \rangle \langle j|) \\
 \\
&= \sum _{j} \langle j|A|j\rangle 
\end{align}
$$This is a useful form, and often the best way to calculate the trace. Informally, if we want to take the trace of an operator $A$ we can simply "sandwich" the operator with the basis states and take the sum. 
If instead, we consider the matrix of $A$ in the basis $|i\rangle$, and recall that the matrix elements of $A$ in this basis are $A_{ij}=\langle i|A|i\rangle$ then $$
\text{tr}(A)=\sum_{i}\langle i|A|i\rangle =\sum_{j}A_{ii}$$
and so the trace operator corresponds to the *sum of the diagonal elements in the matrix*. If we have an operator in matrix form, this is incredibly simple. 


> [!info] The trace of Hermitian operators
> In the case that $A$ is *Hermitian*, a natural choice of basis is the eigenbasis of $A$. This will be the diagonal form of the operator. If we denote the eigenvalues and eigenvectors by $\lambda_{i}$ and $|e_{i}\rangle$ respectively, then $$
\text{tr} (A) =\sum_{i}\langle e_{i}|A|e_{i}\rangle =\sum_{i}\lambda_{i}$$
That is, for Hermitian operators, the trace is just the sum of the eigenvalues. This means it is easy to find the trace of a Hermitian operator if we know its eigenvalues.


> [!info] Cyclic symmetry
> A useful mathematical property of the trace is the fact that it has **cyclic symmetry**. In particular$$
\text{tr} (AB)=\text{tr} (BA) \qquad \text{for all }A,B$$\
and $$
\text{tr} (ABC)=\text{tr} (BCA)=\text{tr} (CAB) \qquad \text{for all }A, B, C$$
and so on.