#Notes 

The presence of entangled states makes quantum theory seem non-local. That is, we've seen previously that when measurements are made on half of an entangled state, the other half collapses due to the measurement in a nonlocal way (i.e. seemingly faster than light `simplification`). We also saw however, that this doesn't lead to instantaneous observable effects at a distance. Maybe the non-locality of quantum theory is unnecessary - or only apparent. 

In fact, this might hint at the possibility that there is some *deeper underlying physical theory* which is able to reproduce all of the predictions of quantum mechanics but is in fact *local*. 

To see why this is plausible, it is instructive to think about how random variables behave in classical probability theory, where we see some analogous effects to entanglement anyway, which challenge us to define exactly what we mean by non-locality in the first place.

Consider a pair of random variables $A$ and $B$ which take values $a,b \in \{ 0,1 \}$ i.e. two bits. Let's assume Alice holds the random variable $A$ and Bob holds $B$. Now, let's consider that their joint probability distribution is 

$$
P(a,b)=\begin{cases}
\frac{1}{2} & a=0,b=0 \\
\frac{1}{2} & a=1,b=1 \\
0 & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$

This corresponds to a situation where Alice and Bob share perfectly correlated bits. 

There is also some non-locality here! The joint probability distribution cannot be described by giving only the marginal distributions $P(a)$ and $P(b)$, but must be described globally by $P(a,b)$. $P(a)$ says that $a$ takes values 0 and 1 each half of the time, but tells us nothing about $b$, namely that it is always the same. This must be done via $P(a,b)$.

In other words, $P(a)$ and $P(b)$ look like reduced density operators, correctly telling us what $A$ and $B$ individually are doing, but also failing to tell us the **correlations** between $A$ and $B$ - i.e. the fact that $a$ is never not equal to $b$. This looks like entanglement in a way.

Moreover, when Alice learns the value of her random variable, we might look at her "collapsing" to the situation where her random variable takes the value she saw with probability 1. Now, if she is asked what the value of Bob's random variable is, she can use $P(b|a)$ to describe it - in the above example, she will know *with certainty* what it is.

So, did Bob's bit somehow change when Alice learnt the value of her bit? Well, obviously not, but Alice's description has indeed changed. 

> [!tip] Analogy 
> This is akin to the "shoe-in-a-box" thought experiment. If I put a shoe in one of two boxes, telling a friend I've done this, and ask my friend to come in and open a box at random, if they open a box without a shoe in it, they know automatically that the shoe is in the other box!

The fact that Alice and Bob have perfectly correlated bits in this example is not at all strange or non-local, and can be easily understood. We can think that there was a source which produced $A$ and $B$, and sent $A$ to Alice and $B$ to Bob. That is, the source provided $(a,b)$ with probability $P(a,b)$, and then sent $a$ to Alice and $b$ to Bob. 

So, it makes sense here, because the correlations were established *in the past* which can be done locally. There would be no way for Alice and Bob's bits to be correlated unless this was the case. So *locality* refers to this fact that correlations are created in the past, in one place, *before* being distributed to separate parties. 

When the entanglement of quantum mechanics was first discovered, many people thought the same thing was happening. They thought that there must be some underlying *local* theory that was governing what we were seeing - and that the apparent non-locality that they saw in QM was exactly analogous to the apparent non-locality we saw above (in the classical example). This became known as a theory of **local hidden variables**. The basic elements of this theory were supposed to be some kind of classical random variables which are "hidden" from us.

However, this was turned on its head when in 1964 John Bell proved that *no such local theory can exist* - so the non-locality of quantum mechanics is inherent to it. 


> [!info] Bell's Theorem
> No theory of local hidden variables can reproduce *all* of the predictions of quantum mechanics.

^f08d7d



