---
dg-publish: true
---
#Notes 

We aim here initially to describe the space of states of two systems, each of which has a qubit as its space of states. This is the quantum version of the space of two bits.

We have the first system in a state $|\psi_A\rangle$ and the second in $|\psi_B\rangle$. We will soon see that the linearity of quantum mechanics means that not all states of the combined system are of this form.

Let us introduce the **tensor product**. This is denoted $\mathbb{C}^2 \otimes \mathbb{C}^2$ of the spaces of each of the qubits. One way of describing the space is to say it is the vector space spanned by the four basis vectors

$$ |0\rangle\otimes |0\rangle,\quad |0\rangle\otimes |1\rangle,\quad |1\rangle\otimes |0\rangle,\quad |1\rangle\otimes |1\rangle $$

The vector $|0\rangle\otimes |0\rangle$ is often written $|0\rangle|0\rangle$ or just $|00\rangle$. The others can be done in the same way.

So, an arbitrary vector in the space is a linear combination of these basis vectors.

$$ |\psi\rangle=a_{00}|00\rangle+a_{01}|01\rangle+a_{10}|10\rangle+a_{11}|11\rangle=\sum^1_{i,j=0}a_{ij}|ij\rangle $$

The vectors can be thought of in column form.

$$ |00\rangle=\begin{pmatrix}1 \\0\\0\\0\end{pmatrix},\quad |01\rangle=\begin{pmatrix}0 \\1\\0\\0\end{pmatrix},\quad |10\rangle=\begin{pmatrix}0\\0\\1\\0\end{pmatrix},\quad |11\rangle=\begin{pmatrix}0\\0\\0\\1\end{pmatrix},\quad $$

If $|\psi_A\rangle=a_0|0\rangle+a_1|1\rangle$ describes the state of the first system, and $|\psi_B\rangle=b_0|0\rangle+b_1|1\rangle$ describes the state of the second system, then the state of the combined system is

$$ \begin{aligned}|\psi_A\rangle \otimes |\psi_B\rangle&= \Big [a_0|0\rangle+a_1|1\rangle\Big]\otimes\Big[b_0|0\rangle+b_1|1\rangle\Big]\\&=a_0b_0|00\rangle+a_0b_1|01\rangle+a_1b_0|10\rangle+a_1b_1|11\rangle\end{aligned} $$

The following rule was used here, which is part of the definition of the tensor product.

$$ \Big[|v_1\rangle+|v_2\rangle\Big]\otimes\Big[|w_1\rangle+|w_2\rangle\Big]=|v_1\rangle|w_1\rangle+|v_1\rangle|w_2\rangle+|v_2\rangle|w_1\rangle+|v_2\rangle|w_2\rangle $$

Thus we can write

$$ \begin{pmatrix} a_0\\a_1\end{pmatrix} \otimes \begin{pmatrix} b_0\\b_1\end{pmatrix} = \begin{pmatrix} a_0b_0\\a_0b_1\\a_1b_0\\a_1b_1\end{pmatrix} $$

We say that the states of the form $|\psi_A\rangle\otimes |\psi_B\rangle$ are of **product form** or **direct product states**.

The inner product of two states in the tensor product is defined as follows. First, we define the inner product on states of product form. ^739f8e

$$ \Big (|v_1\rangle|v_2\rangle,|w_1\rangle|w_2\rangle\Big)=\langle v_1|w_1\rangle\langle v_2|w_2\rangle $$

We can then use the fact that an inner product is linear on the second factor (conjugate linear on the first), and so

$$ \Big (|v_1\rangle|v_2\rangle, \big [|w_1\rangle|w_2\rangle+|z_1\rangle|z_2\rangle \big]\Big)=\Big (|v_1\rangle|v_2\rangle,|w_1\rangle|w_2\rangle\Big)+\Big (|v_1\rangle|v_2\rangle,|z_1\rangle|z_2\rangle\Big)=\langle v_1|w_1\rangle\langle v_2|w_2\rangle+\langle v_1|z_1\rangle\langle v_2|z_2\rangle $$

Some particular cases that are useful are

$$ \Big (|0\rangle|0\rangle,|0\rangle|0\rangle\Big)=1,\quad \Big (|0\rangle|0\rangle,|0\rangle|1\rangle\Big)=0 \quad \text{etc.} $$

It is fundamentally important that not all quantum states of two (or more) systems are of product form. For example, consider the states

$$ |\Psi_1\rangle=\frac{|00\rangle+|11\rangle}{\sqrt 2}, \quad |\Psi_2\rangle =\frac{|01\rangle-|10\rangle}{\sqrt 2} $$

Consider $|\Psi_1\rangle$. If we could write it in product form, we could write it as

$$ a_0b_0|00\rangle+a_0b_1|01\rangle+a_1b_0|10\rangle+a_1b_1|11\rangle $$

for some choice of parameters. However, looking at the $|01\rangle$ term, we see either $a_0$ or $b_1$ must be zero (since there is no $|01\rangle$ term in $\Psi_1$), which means that either the $|00\rangle$ or $|11\rangle$ must _also be zero_. This cannot be, since it is in $|\Psi_1\rangle$, and so we cannot write $|\Psi_1\rangle$ in product form.

> Any state that is not of product form is said to be **entangled**.

^9da800

The more general tensor product for general Hilbert spaces is defined as follows. Consider the tensor product of $\mathbb{C} ^n$ with $\mathbb{C} ^m$. We may define the tensor product as the space spanned by

$$ |v_i\rangle\otimes |w_j\rangle $$

where $|v_i\rangle,i=0\dots n-1$ is a basis for $\mathbb{C} ^n$ and $|w_j\rangle,j=0\dots m-1$ is a basis for $\mathbb{C}^m$. The dimension of the vector space is $mn$.