---
dg-publish: true
---
#Notes 

If an operator $A$ acts on the Hilbert space of the first system, and an operator $B$ acts on the Hilbert space of the second system, then we define the action of the operator $A \otimes B$ on the tensor product space as follows.

Let $|\psi\rangle$ be a general state on the tensor product space.

$$ |\psi\rangle= \sum_{i,j} \alpha_{ij}|v_i\rangle|w_j\rangle $$

where $\{|v_i\rangle\}$ and $\{|w_j\rangle\}$ are the basis’ for the first and second Hilbert spaces respectively. Then, we can define the operator $A\otimes B$ by

$$ A\otimes B|\psi\rangle=\sum_{i,j}\alpha_{ij} A|v_i\rangle \otimes B|w_j\rangle $$

(i.e. $A\otimes B$ acts linearly). Note that in some cases (clarity reasons only), we can write

$$ A|v_i\rangle\otimes B|w_j\rangle=A|v_i\rangle B|w_j\rangle $$

Consider $X\otimes Z$ on $\mathbb{C}^2$.

$$ \begin{aligned}X\otimes Z|0\rangle\otimes|0\rangle&=X|0\rangle\otimes Z|0\rangle\equiv X|0\rangle Z|0\rangle=|1\rangle|0\rangle;\\X\otimes Z|1\rangle|1\rangle&=X|1\rangle Z|1\rangle=-|0\rangle|1\rangle\end{aligned} $$

So, for example

$$ X\otimes Z \frac{|0\rangle|0\rangle+|1\rangle|1\rangle}{\sqrt 2}=\frac{|1\rangle|0\rangle-|0\rangle|1\rangle}{\sqrt 2} $$

An important example might be to consider the situation where Alice acts with say $X$, and Bob does nothing. In this case, this corresponds to the operator $X\otimes I$ being applied to the whole Hilbert space.

The most general operator on a tensor product space is a sum of operators of the form $A\otimes B$, for example $X\otimes Z+Z\otimes X$ on $\mathbb{C}^2\otimes \mathbb{C}^2$.

$$ \big (X\otimes Z+Z\otimes X\big )|0\rangle|0\rangle=|1\rangle|0\rangle+|0\rangle|1\rangle $$

(see [[Operators]] for definitions).

Any operator that can be written in the form $A\otimes B$ is called a **local operator** - it corresponds to Alice and Bob each acting in their own Hilbert space, without interaction.

Note that a local operator takes product states to product states. For any $|\phi\rangle$ and $|\eta\rangle$,

$$ A\otimes B|\phi\rangle|\eta\rangle=A|\phi\rangle \otimes B|\eta\rangle $$

But, an operator that takes a particular orthonormal basis of product states to an orthonormal basis of product states is _not necessarily_ a local operator. A famous example is the **controlled-not (CNOT)** on $\mathbb{C}^2\otimes \mathbb{C}^2$.

$$ \text{CNOT}|0\rangle|0\rangle=|0\rangle|0\rangle \\ \text{CNOT}|0\rangle|1\rangle=|0\rangle|1\rangle\\\text{CNOT}|1\rangle|0\rangle=|1\rangle|1\rangle\\\text{CNOT}|1\rangle|1\rangle=|1\rangle|0\rangle $$

Two states $|\Psi_1\rangle$ and $|\Psi_2\rangle$ are said to be _equivalent under local unitary transformations_ if

$$ |\Psi_2\rangle=U_1\otimes U_2|\Psi_1\rangle $$

As we will see later, this means that such states have equivalent amounts of entanglelement.